1. Introduction

Time management is an important aspect for every learner, professional, or individual. A To-Do List application helps people organize their activities in a proper way.

This project, "To-Do List with Priority Levels," should be designed to enable users to create, view, update, and delete tasks while being able to categorize them according to the urgency of High, Medium, or Low priority.


The aim of this project is to create, by using Python, a simple and user-friendly task-management system that is efficient.

-

2. Objectives

The primary objectives of this project are:

To develop a basic task management system.

To designate a priority level for each task in order of its importance.

To implement CRUD operations: Create, Read, Update, Delete.

To understand data handling and simple program structure.



To present to the user an orderly, easy-to-use interface.

-

3. System Requirements

Hardware Requirements

A computer with at least 2 GB RAM

1 GHz processor


Basic keyboard and display

Software Requirements

Python 3.14.0

Code editor VS Code



Optional: JSON file for data storage



4. Methodology

The working of the project is as follows:

Step 1: Adding a Task

The user inputs:

Task name

Task Description (optional)


Priority level (High / Medium / Low)

Step 2: Store the Task

Each task is represented in a data structure such as lists or dictionaries.

Optional: Data can be saved to a JSON file.

Step 3: Displaying Tasks

Tasks are represented using:

Title


Priority level

Status (Pending / Completed)

Tasks can be sorted by priorities.

Step 4: Updating a Task

A user can:

Edit task details


Change its priority

Mark it as completed


Step 5: Deleting a Task

It allows the user to permanently remove tasks from the list.

As will be discussed hereafter, the persons carrying on such business are liable to pay income-tax not only in respect of the said business but also in respect of all other income accrued to them.

5. System Design
5.1 Flowchart
┌────────────────┐
│ Start Program  │
└───────┬────────┘
│
┌───────▼────────┐
│ Show Menu       │
└───────┬────────┘
│
┌─────────────┼──────────────────┐
▼             ▼                  ▼
Add Task   View Tasks      Update/Delete Task
│             │                  │
└─────────────┴──────────────────┘
│


┌───────▼────────┐

│ Exit Program   │

└────────────────┘



6. Implementation

6.1 Programming Language

Python was chosen because:


It is easy to understand

Supports structured programming

Ideal for beginners
6.2 Sample Code Snippet
tasks = []
def add_task():

title = input("Enter task title: ")
priority = input("Enter priority (High/Medium/Low): ")

tasks.append({"title": title, "priority": priority, "status": "Pending"})


print("Task added successfully!")

def view_tasks():

for t in tasks:

print(f"{t['title']} - {t['priority']} - {t['status']}")

add_task()

view_tasks()




7. Results and Discussion


The application successfully performs the following:

Adds tasks with priority levels

Displays tasks in a clean format

Allows updating and deleting of tasks

Marks tasks as completed

This classification based on priorities allows the user to focus on urgent tasks first.

The project demonstrates the handling of data, conditional logic, and modular programming.



-

8. Advantages

Simple and easy to use

Helps in organizing daily activities

Improves time management



Priority levels determine the importance of a task.

Easily extensible to either GUI or mobile app development



9. Limitations

Currently text-based-no GUI

No automatic reminders

Limited storage (unless JSON or database is used)



10. Future Enhancements

Add deadlines and notifications

Create Graphical User Interface: Tkinter/HTML Adding categories for tasks Leverage databases for big data storage. Introduce a login system for multiple users --- 

11. Conclusion The To-Do List with Priority Levels project represents a very useful application that is practical, and which assists users in managing their tasks effectively.
It demonstrates core programming concepts such as data structures, file handling, functions, and user input handling. The project is simple but effective and serves as a robust foundation for higher-level task management systems.
